
		Planet

	Planet generating program
	Copyright 1988-2021 Torben Æ. Mogensen
	With contributions from Jim Burrows

The program generates planet maps based on recursive spatial
subdivision of a tetrahedron containing the globe (earlier versions
used a rectangular box). The output is a bitmap file, with a choice of
different formats.

--------------

March 2021 Fixed longitude displacement in icosahedral projection.

February 2020: Changed the way contour lines work, see description below.

January 2018: Replaced search feature with a "match" option (-M).  See
details below.

January 2018: Fixed bug in square projection that would sometimes
leave blank top line where it should not be.  Also fixed bug in
sinusoidal projection that distorted zoomed maps.

May 2016: When outputting a BMP file, a copy of the command line is
appended to the end of the file.  This should not affect bitmap
viewers (I tried a few different ones), but it allows you to recreate
the parameters used to create the map.  On Linux, MacOS and other
Unix-derived systems, the command "tail -1 <file name>" outputs the
last line of a file.  When outputting XPM or PPM files, the command
line is added as a comment line near the start of the file.

March 2016: Added a possibility to rotate the planet befoer applying
grids and latitude-dependent colouring.  This required a small change
in the generation method which means that maps generated with the same
seed give different results before and after the change.  The old
version (named "oldplanet.c") will no longer be updated, but can be
used if you wish to recreate old maps.

November 2014: Made heightfield an output option instead of a projection.

March 2014: Made -c option cumulative, fixed bug in grid generation.

March 2013: Added icosahedral projection.

New as of February 2013:

 - A web interface can be found at http://topps.diku.dk/torbenm/maps.msp

   A thing to note if you are using both the web tool and the offline
   program is that seeds in the web tool are integers that get "0."
   prefixed to them to get the equivalent for seed for the offline
   version.  So, for example, the seed 1111111 in the web tool
   corresponds to the option "-s 0.1111111" in the offline program.

New in the November 2011 version:

 - A new, more generic, method is used to draw gridlines.  This uses
   more memory but can be much faster on maps with high magnification.

 - Snowcaps (when using -c option) are made smaller, as they were
   excessively large in previous versions.

 - The default colour map is changed.

 - The Mollweide projection can now be shown centered at arbitrary
   latitudes.

---------------

Usage: planet [options]

options:

  -s seed	    Specifies seed as number between 0.0 and 1.0
  -w width	    Specifies width in pixels, default = 800
  -h height	    Specifies height in pixels, default = 600
  -m magnification  Specifies magnification, default = 1.0
  -o output_file    Specifies output file, default is standard output
  -l longitude	    Specifies longitude of centre in degrees, default = 0.0
  -L latitude	    Specifies latitude of centre in degrees, default = 0.0
  -g gridsize	    Specifies vertical gridsize in degrees, default = 0.0 (no grid)
  -G gridsize	    Specifies horisontal gridsize in degrees, default = 0.0 (no grid)
  -i init_alt	    Specifies initial altitude (default = -0.02)
  -c		    Colour depends on latitude (cumulative, default: only altitude) (polar icecaps)
The strongly and very strongly options can be achieved by using -c several 
times. -c -c gives the strongly option, and -c -c -c gives the very strongly option.
  -n                Apply non-linear scaling to altitude.  This makes land flatter near sea level
  -S                Make more "wrinkly" maps
  -C file	    Read colour definitions from file
  -O		    Produce a black and white outline map
  -E		    Trace the edges of land in black on colour map
  -B		    Use ``bumpmap'' shading
  -b		    Use ``bumpmap'' shading on land only
  -d                Use ``daylight'' shading
  -a angle	    Angle of ``light'' in bumpmap shading
                    or longitude of sun in daylight shading
  -A latitude	    Latitude of sun in daylight shading
  -P		    Use PPM file format (default is BMP)
  -x		    Use XPM file format (default is BMP)
  -H		    Output heightfield (default is BMP)
  -M delta	    Read map from standard input and match new points to
                    map if edge length greater than delta (default = 0.1)
  -V number         Distance contribution to variation (default = 0.035)
  -v number         Altitude contribution to variation (default = -0.45)
  -T lo la          Rotate map so what would otherwise be at latitude la
                    and longitude lo is moved to (0,0).  This is
                    different from using -l and -L because this rotation
                    is done before applying gridlines and latitude-based
                    effects.
  -pprojection	    Specifies projection: m = Mercator (default)
					  p = Peters
					  q = Square
					  s = Stereographic
					  o = Orthographic
					  g = Gnomonic
					  a = Area preserving azimuthal
					  c = Conical (conformal)
					  M = Mollweide
					  S = Sinusoidal
					  h = Heightfield (obsolete. Use -H option instead)
					  i = Icosahedral
					  f = Find match, see below

The order of the options is irrelevant, except that later options
override earlier ones.  The projection letter can follow immediately
after "-p" (as in "-pM") or they can be separated by space (as in "-p M").

As an example, to generate a stereographic projection of a planet
generated from seed 0.3 with magnification 3 centered around 30¡
north, 35¡ east with gridlines every 10 degrees on latitudes and every
20 degrees on longitudes, outputting the result as a 320x256 bitmap in
the file p.bmp, use the command

planet -ps -s 0.3 -m 3 -L 30 -l 35 -G 10 -g 20 -w 320 -h 256 -o p.bmp

The initial altitude (-i) option specifies the initial altitude of the
corners of the box, before subdivison. Increasing this will increase
the amount of land on the planet and vice-versa. The default value is
-0.015, which gives a slight preference for water. Changing this value
by +/- 0.01 will change the water percentage by 5-15% (depending on
the planet in question). If you, for example, want a planet with 70%
water, you can make a world map using the -pp option (which prints the
water percentage, see below) and adjust the initial altitude using the
-i option until the indicated water percentage is 70.

The -V and -v options control the contribution of distance and
altitude difference to altitude variation.  The higher these numbers
are, the more ragged your landscape will be.  The -V number controls
how much altitude changes by distance and the -v number controls how
much the steepness of terrain affects roughness.  The idea is that
level terrain tends to be less rugged than sloping terrain.  You
shouldn't let the values vary by more than a factor of 2 from the
default values.

The -B option activates bumpmap shading. This shades the colour
depending on the angle, creating more ``3-dimensional'' looking maps.
The -b option activates bumpmap shading for land only (leaving sea
smooth). The -a option can change the angle of ``light'' for bumpmap
shading.  The -d option activates daylight shading, which means that
shading is done relative to a sun positioned at a longitude/latitude
specified by the -a and -A options, creating a dark night side and a
light dayside and visible bumps near the terminator.  Note that using
bumpmaps will make the map use full 24-bit colours, irrespective of
the number of colours specified in the colour scheme (see below).

The -E option traces the outline at the land/sea border in black, but
depends on the colour scheme), and -O shows only this outline (and
contour lines, if these are specified), making both land and sea
white.  These maps are output as 1bpp bitmaps, making them compact,
but you can't use bumpmaps.  Use the white colour scheme (see below)
for that.  Both -E and -O can optionally draw additional contour lines
at other altitudes.  This is enabled by following the -E or -O (with
no space in between) with an integer that specifies the number of
contour lines.  With the -E option, contour lines alternate between
two colours.  Contour lines are slightly thinner than the sea/land
outline.  Note that the colours of contour lines can be changed by the
colour scheme.  If a negative number of contour lines is specified,
this indicates the number of contour lines at sea, each spaced at 5\%
of the difference between sea level and deep sea. This can to some
extend emulate the tradition of drawing 1--3 thin lines outside coasts
on hand-drawn maps, but whereas these are traditionally spaced equally
by distance from the coast, the contour lines are spaced by water depth.

The -C option specifies a file from which colour definitions are
read.

The format of a colour file is a sequence of lines each consisting of
four integers:

colour_number red green blue

where 0 <= colour_number <= 65535 and 0 <= red, green, blue <= 255.

The colour numbers must be increasing. The first colours have special
uses:

 0 is usually black (0,0,0)
 1 is usually white (255,255,255)
 2 is the background colour
 3 is used for latitude/longitude grid lines
 4 and 5 are used for outlines and contour lines
 6 upwards are used for altitudes

Halfway between 6 and the max colour is sea level. The shallowest sea
is coloured with (max+6)/2, and land with colours above this. With
65536 colours, (max+6)/2 = 32770.  With 256 colours, (max+6)/2 = 130.
Colours between specified colour numbers are interpolated.

An example colour file (default.col) is shown below
0 0 0 0
1 255 255 255
2 255 255 255
3 0 0 0
4 0 0 0
5 255 0 0
6 0 0 255
130 0 128 255
131 0 255 0
200 64 192 16
250 128 128 32
255 255 255 255

This uses 256 colours.  The background (2) is set to white and grid
lines (3) to black.  Outlines are also black, but if more contour
lines are used, every other is red.  Colour 6 is deep blue, for deep
sea.  This changes to a light blue at colour 130 (shallowest sea),
then at colour 131, a light green is used, which changes to a darker,
yellowish green at colour 250, then to brown at colour 250 and white
at colour 255.  Note that the change between sea and land occurs at
(6+255)/2 = 130.

Some predefined colour schemes are provided:

 - Olsson.col is a colour map inspired by a map program made by
   Olsson.  This is now the default colour map.

 - OlssonLight.col is a variant of Olsson.col using lighter colours.

 - default.col (described above) is the previous default colour map.

 - defaultB.col is like default.col, except that the background colour
   is black.

 - burrows.col is an alternative colour scheme provided by Jim
   Burrows, supposed to be more like what is used in atlases.

 - burrowsB.col is like burrows.col, except that the background colour
   is black.

 - Bathymetric.col imitates a colourmap used in some old atlases.

 - Lefebvre.col gives a pale, atlas-like colouring suitable for
   adding text and symbols on top.

 - Lefebvre2.col is another contribution by Olivier Lefebvre.

 - mars.col is supposed to give colouring similar to Mars.  You can
   probably do better yourself.

 - wood.col is supposed to give a wood-like texture.  The effect is
   not convincing.

 - white.col makes land and sea uniformly white.  This may sound
   uninteresting, but if you add outlines and bumpmaps or contour
   lines you can get maps that work well in black-and-white print.

 - greyscale.col uses shades of grey to represent altitudes.

 - Blackbody.col is based on black-body radiation (heat maps).


The "-H" option produces a heightfield instead of a bitmap file.  Each
point on the map is printed as an integer in the range (approximately)
-1.2*10^6 to 1.2*10^6, representing the altitude at that point.
Points outside the planet are given height 0.  Options controlling
colours and gridlines are ignored. This option is intended to produce
input to programs that, e.g., show 3D views of small areas of the
planet.  The obsolete "-ph" option corresponds to "-po -H".


The projections:

The Mercator, Peters and square projections project the globe onto a
cylinder wrapped around the equator of the globe. The cylinder is then
unfolded to give a flat map. Hence, lines of equal longitude or
latitude map to vertical or horisontal lines respectively.

The Mercator projection preserves angles (it is a conformal mapping)
and compass directions but distorts area quite heavily towards the
poles.  The map extends infinitely north/south.

The Peters projection project a point horisontally out to the cylinder
(which is afterwards strected by a factor of 2). It preserves relative
area, but not angles or compass directions (expect for directly east,
west, north or south). Areas near the equator will appear stretched
up/down (by a factor of 2 at the equator) whereas areas near the poles
are flattened. At latitude 45 degrees, shapes have approximately the
right proportions. When the Peters projection is specified, the water
percentage is printed on the stderr stream. This is mainly interesting
if a full-world map is generated (magnification = 1).

The square projection projects latitudes equidistantly. This
projection preserves neither area nor angles, but it preserves
distances in the vertical direction.

The Mollweide projection maps the earth to an ellipse. It preserves
area. It is mainly used for world-maps and is best viewed with the -g
option, as longitudes are strongly distorted.

The sinusoidal projection maps the globe onto 12 sinusoidal "slices".
The projection preserves area as well as distance from equator. A
globe can be made from this projection by folding the map into a
cylinder and bending the slice tops/bottoms inwards.

The icosahedral projection maps the globe onto the faces of an
unfolded icosahedron (as used in maps for the Traveller game), using
the gnonomic projection for each face.  There are tiny discontinuities
where the faces meet, so you shouldn't zoom too much at these edges.

Mercator, Peters, square, Mollweide, icosahedral and sinusoidal maps
at magnification 1 are scaled to fit the Width.  Except for the
Mercator projection (which has infinite height), icosahedral and
Peters, a full world map using these projections is twice as wide as
it is high.  Icosahedral maps are 2.117 times as wide as high.  With
the Peters projection, the width is pi/2 times the height, so a map
628 pixels wide needs 400 pixels height to fit the full map.  If the
-L option (center latitude), the Mollweide projection rotates the
planet to center at this latitude, but the rest of these projections
just shifts the map up or down, so the standard meridian is still the
equator.

Assuming an Earth-sized planet of circumference 40000km we can relate
this to scaling factors. To find the equatorial scaling factor, divide
4x10^9 by the width of the map (in centimeters) and then by the
magnification factor. Hence, a map of width 20cm at magnification 2
has a scale of 1:1x10^8 at equator. For the Mercator projection, the
scale at latitude L is 1/cos(L) times the equatorial scale. Hence, a
map of width 20cm and magnification 2 has scale 1:1.416x10^8 at
latitude 45° and scale 1:2x10^8 at latitude 60°.

A number of azimuthal projections are available.  An azimuthal
projection projects the globe onto a plane that touches the globe at
the specified longitude and latitude.  Azimuthal projections are
approximately accurate at the centre of the map, but distort areas
away from this. The different azimuthal projections distort in
different ways:

Stereographic projection projects a point on the surface by following
a line that starts in the point on the globe opposite the point that
touches the plane and goes through the point of interest, until this
line hits the plane. It preserves angles (i.e. local shape) but
neither area nor compass directions.  The entire globe is mapped onto
the infinite plane, so you can never get a full world map.  The
distortion will be very severe when more than a hemisphere is shown.

Orthographic projection projects at right angles to the plane. It
preserves nothing of interest, but is what you would see if you view
the planet from space (from infinite distance). It can never show more
than a hemisphere (which is mapped to a circle disk).

Gnomonic projection projects along a line starting in the center of
the globe. It has the property that great circles are mapped to
straight lines, which makes it useful for navigating by sea or air. A
hemisphere maps to the infinite plane, so it can never show all of a
hemisphere and distortion gets severe when you get more than 60
degrees away from the centre.

Area preserving azimuthal projection preserves relative areas, but not
shapes or angles etc.  It maps the entire globe onto a circle of a
radius twice that of the globe, but distortion is severe away from the
centre.

The orthographic projections are scaled so the diameter of the planet
at magnification 1 is the full Height of the picture.  Stereographic,
gnomonic and area preserving azimuthal projections use the same scale
as orthographic in the center of the picture.  To find the scaling
factor (again assuming Earth-sized planets) at the centre of the
picture, divide 1.273x10^9 by the height of the map (in centimeters)
and the magnification factor. Hence, a map of height 20cm with
magnification 2 will have a central scale of 1:3.18x10^7. This is
independent of latitude. To obtain a scale of 1:S, multiply 1.273x10^9
by the height of the map (in cm) and divide by S to obtain the
magnification factor to use with the program. To get, e.g., 1:10^7 on
a map of height 20cm, use -m 2546. As the size of the map in cm
depends on how many pixels per cm the output media uses, the program
can not calculate actual scales.

The conical projection is a conformal (angle preserving) projection
from the sphere onto a cone that touches the specified latitude.  The
cone is cut opposite the specified longitude and laid flat, so it
appears like a pie section.  For latitudes close to 0 or ±90°, the
conical projection approaches the Mercator and stereographic
projections (respectively).  If the extremes are specified, these will
be used instead of the conical projection.  The scale at the center of
the map is the same as for ortographic and stereographic projections.
This projection is good for mapping areas that have large east-west
extent and are not close to the equator (such as Canada or
Russia). Using conical projection, all of the planet is mapped onto a
finite section of a cone, so you can make complete world maps. It is,
however, not really suited for this, as latitudes far away from the
specified latitude are very distorted.

Regardless of the projection used, maps that show only small sections
of the planet will have little distortion and the scale will differ
very little across the map.


Match feature:

The -M delta option specifies a number delta (in the range 0.03 to
1.0, default 0.1). A map sketch must be given on standard input.
This map is 12 lines of 24 characters. The characters are:

   . : very deep water
   , : deep water
   : : water
   ; : shallow water
   - : sea level
   * : low land
   o : land
   O : high land
   @ : very high land

An example of a map specification (roughly representing Earth) is
shown here:

;:::----ooo;;*;;;;-;;;;;
-*****---*-:-o**oooooo**
;;:-o***-::-**oOOooo*--:
,,,;Oo*::::*;;-*O@Oo-;,,
,,,:;*-;::;ooo**-**-::,,
,,,,,;-*-::**oo-:;--;::,
:,,,,,-oo*,:;o*;:,;--*-;
;,:::::O*;,:;o;;:::-oo-;
;,,::::o;,::,;:;:;:;:*:-
:::::::-;;:::,::;;:::::;
;::;;;-*:::;;;;--------;
************************

It can also be found in the file "earth.map".

The character positions correspond to grid points at 15-degree
spacings, both horisontally and vertically, corresponding to a square
projection of a full world map, no matter which projection or
magnification is used for the generated map.

The match feature is implemented so the first few subdivisions (while
the edge length is greater than delta) do not use random mid-point
displacement, but instead chooses midpoint altitudes based on the
nearest point on the map sketch.  What this means is that the overall
shape of the generated map will be similar to the map sketch, but you
will not get an exact match, and the seed given to the program affects
the finer details of the generated map.  The larger delta is, the less
like the sketch the map will be.  A delta smaller than 0.03 will give
a pixelated map, as more points are forced to equal the pixelated
sketch.


Various notes:

It is assumed that pixels are square.  I have included procedures that
will print the maps as uncompressed bmp (default), ppm or xpm bitmaps
on standard output or specified files.  Use external programs to
convert to JPEG, PNG or other compressed formats.

I have tried to avoid using machine specific features, so it should be
easy to port the program to any machine. Beware, though that due to
different floating point precision on different machines, the same
seed numbers can yield very different planets.  The IEEE 754 standard
should in theory guarantee identical results across IEEE 754 compliant
platforms, but this depends on whether the same precision and rounding
modes are used.

The primitive user interface is primarily a result of portability
concerns.

Installation:

The program and a number of files (including this manual) are provided
in a Zip file called "planet.zip".  Extract this using e.g. WinZip (on
Windows) or unzip (linux/unix).  Most browsers support extraction
directly from the browser.

A makefile is provided for compiling the program, so if you have make
installed on your computer you can just write "make all" to compile
the program.  If not, you can use the following simplified method:

How to compile the program:

On a unix platform, just write

	cc planet.c -o planet -lm -O

or, if using Gnu C (GCC)

	gcc planet.c -o planet -lm -O

On a Windows machine, the same method can be used, but the executable
should be names "planet.exe" instead of just plain "planet".  I have
successfully used the Tiny C Compiler (http://bellard.org/tcc/) on
Windows Vista.  Using TCC, you compile with the command

	tcc planet.c -o planet.exe

Note that you may have to specify the full path name to the tcc
compiler (tcc.exe).

Enquiries and error reports can be sent to torbenm@diku.dk.

